README.md, before:

<div align="center">

  <h1>Beanstalk 🌱</h1>

  <p>
    <strong>A lightweight language and toolchain for bringing joy back to building UIs, web pages and typesetting</strong>
  </p>

  *The only BS in programming should be in the filename*

  <br>

  ---
  <br>

  <p>⚠️ This is currently a work in progress compiler and proof of concept. It's not recommended you try and actually use it</p>
  <p>⚠️ The design and direction of the language is still subject to change</p>
  <p> (There isn't even a semantic version yet!)</p>

[//]: # (  <h1>)

[//]: # (    <a href="https://nyejames.github.io/beanstalk">)

[//]: # (      Plans and Documentation)

[//]: # (    </a>)

[//]: # (  </h1>)

  <p>The first proof of concept for the syntax has been figured out, and now the compiler is being completely refactored to accommodate these changes</p>

[//]: # (  <p>The docs were created using this language. The output of the compiler is directly pushed to GitHub pages. Not everything in the documentation has been implemented fully, it's mostly full of design plans.</p>)
  <a href="https://github.com/nyejames/beanstalk-plugin">Language support / syntax highlighting for Visual Studio / VSCode can be found here</a>

</div>

<br>
<br>

# Overview / Goals
Beanstalk is a lightweight, statically typed and compiled programming language.

The whole language is built around special template strings called 'Scenes'.

The goal is to also be a more general lightweight Wasm based UI building language that could be great for creating websites, webapps or embedding in any application or game.

HTML projects will use JS, CS and HTML to build websites and tie into the Wasm.

**Design Goals**
- Minimal syntax with a focus around text content / typesetting and styling or configs
- Simple, static type system
- Batteries included with powerful built-in standard library
- Fast compile times to support hot reloading
- No LLVM backend
- Borrow checker with no unsafe and simplified move semantics / lifetimes

The language aims to be great for building a website, making config files or as a lightweight embedded or UI language for apps and games.

### Compiled Output
Beanstalk aims to just output Wasm and have its own backend for doing this, but JS is currently the primary output for web while the language is being created.

More JS will gradually get replaced, but only in cases where stricter runtime types or greater performance is needed.

The compiler aims to output as little bytecode/glue code as possible. No 100kb Wasm files to just print "hello world".

Being compiled means folding constants, type checking and optimizing the output to be as small as possible is all done for you.
 
The compiler itself is written in Rust, and uses as few dependencies/libraries as possible to keep it fast and reliable. Beanstalk also aims to have close ties to Rust and intends to be able to directly use Rust libraries in the future.

### Dependencies currently used in the compiler
- [wat2wasm](https://github.com/WebAssembly/wabt) for compiling wat to Wasm

<br>

Commit message:

Updated readme and starting to rename Scenes to Templates

README.md, after:

<div align="center">

  <h1>Beanstalk 🌱</h1>

  <p>
    <strong>A lightweight, purpose built, programming language and toolchain that compiles to Web Assembly.</strong>
  </p>

  *The only BS in programming should be in the filename*

  <br>

  ---
  <br>

  <p>⚠️ This is currently a work in progress compiler and proof of concept. It's not recommended you try and actually use it</p>
  <p>⚠️ The design and direction of the language is still subject to change</p>
  <p> (There isn't even a semantic version yet!)</p>

[//]: # (  <h1>)

[//]: # (    <a href="https://nyejames.github.io/beanstalk">)

[//]: # (      Plans and Documentation)

[//]: # (    </a>)

[//]: # (  </h1>)

  <p>The first proof of concept for the syntax has been figured out, and now the compiler is being completely refactored to accommodate these changes</p>

[//]: # (  <p>The docs were created using this language. The output of the compiler is directly pushed to GitHub pages. Not everything in the documentation has been implemented fully, it's mostly full of design plans.</p>)
  <a href="https://github.com/nyejames/beanstalk-plugin">Language support / syntax highlighting for Visual Studio / VSCode can be found here</a>

</div>

<br>
<br>

# Overview / Goals
Beanstalk is a statically typed language that compiles to Wasm and aims to generate glue code for that Wasm.

The whole language is built around an extremely clean template syntax.

The goal is to also be a more general lightweight Wasm-focused language. 
The language aims to be great for building a website, making config files or as a lightweight embedded or UI language for apps and games.

**Design Goals**
- Minimal syntax with very powerful string templates for generating text content / typesetting and styling or configs
- Simple, static type system
- Comes batteries-included with as much tooling as possible integrated directly in the compiler
- Fast compile times to support hot reloading
- No LLVM backend, no preferred Wasm runtime targets
- Borrow checker with no 'unsafe' and much simpler move semantics / lifetimes than Rust

### Compiled Output
The compiler aims to optimise specifically for Wasm, and create small and efficient modules. No 100kb Wasm files to just print "hello world".

Being compiled means folding constants, type checking and optimising is all done for you.
But the priority is to compile fast and small modules rather than highly optimised ones.

The compiler itself is written in Rust, and uses as few dependencies as possible to keep it fast and reliable.

<br>
